The following content is provided under
a Creative Common License. Your support
will help MIT Open Courseware continue
to offer high-quality educational
resources for free. To make a donation
or view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open
Courseware at
ocw.mmit.edu. All right, let's get
started. Today we have another cool
graph algorithm or problem. Actually,
we'll have two
algorithms. Problem is called minimum
spanning tree. You can probably guess
from the title what it's trying to do.
We'll see two algorithms for doing it.
Both of them are in the category of
greedy algorithms, which is something
we've seen a couple of times already in
6046. Uh starting with lecture one. This
is the definition of greedy algorithm
from lecture one roughly. Uh the idea is
to always make greedy choices. meaning
the choice is locally best for right
now. It seems like a good thing to do.
Uh but maybe in the future it will screw
you over and if you have a correct
greedy algorithm, you prove that it
won't screw you over. So it's sort of
like Cookie Monster here. Always locally
seems like a good idea to eat another
cookie, but maybe it'll bite you in the
future. So, uh, today we will embrace
our inner cookie monster and, uh, eat as
many eat the largest cookie first would
be the standard algorithm for cookie
monster. Um, I don't know if you learned
that in Sesame Street, but um, all
right. So, uh, what's the problem?
Minimum spanning tree. Can anyone tell
me what a tree is formally? Not the
outside thing,
but in graphland.
A cyclic graph. Close.
connected a cyclic graph. Good. That's
important.
This is 6042
stuff. Okay. So, uh how about a spanning
tree?
Sorry. contains all the contains all the
vertices. Yeah. So let me go over
here. Spanning means it contains all the
vertices. So uh implicit here I guess is
subtree or subgraph. You're given a
graph. You want a spanning tree of that
graph
uh is going to be a tree that lives
inside the graph. So we're going to take
some of the edges of G, make a tree out
of them, make a connected asyclic graph,
and that tree should hit all the
vertices in G. So this is going to
be subset of the edges or subgraph.
uh those edges should form a
tree and
uh I'll say hit all vertices of
G. Okay, if I just said uh they should
form a tree, then I could say, well,
take no edges and here's a a tree with
one vertex. That's not very interesting.
You want a vert, you want basically the
vertex set of the tree to be the same as
the vertex set of the graph. That's the
spanning property. But you still want it
to be a tree. So you want it to be
connected and you want it to be a
cyclic. Uh now if G is disconnected,
this is impossible. Uh and for that you
could define a spanning forest to be
like a maximal thing like this. But
we'll focus on the case here G is
connected. That's the interesting case.
And so we can get a spanning tree. All
right. So what is this minimum spanning
tree problem?
Uh minimum spanning tree, we're given a
weighted graph.
Just like last time with shortest paths,
we
have an edge weight
function W giving me a real number.
Let's say for every edge and we want to
find a spanning tree of minimum total
weight. So I'm going to define the
weight of a tree t to be uh the sum over
all edges in t because I'm viewing a
spanning tree as a set of edges of the
weight of that
edge. Okay, so pretty much what you
would expect minimum weight spanning
tree
uh it's a relatively simple problem but
it's not so easy to find an algorithm.
uh you need to prove a lot to make sure
that you really uh find the right tree.
Uh I guess the the really naive
algorithm here would be to try all
spanning
trees. Uh compute the weight of each
spanning tree and return the minimum.
That seems reasonable. That's correct.
Uh but it's bad because
H
n to the 4th. That would be nice. Uh
it's larger than that.
Maybe not so obvious. Uh but it can be
exponential. Uh here's a graph where the
number of spanning trees is exponential.
This is a complete bipartite graph uh
with two vertices on one side and n
vertices on the other. And so you can
let's say we put these two edges into
the spanning tree. And now uh for each
of these vertices we can choose whether
it connects to the left vertex or the
right vertex. It can only do one but it
can do either one independently. So
maybe this guy chooses the left one.
This one chooses the right one. This one
chooses the left one and so on. If I
have n vertices down here, I have two to
the n different spanning
trees. So there can be an exponential
number. So that algorithm is not so
good exponential bad polomial good. So
today we're going to get a polomial
algorithm. In fact we will get an almost
linear time algorithm uh as fast as
Dyster's algorithm. But uh we can't use
Dyster's algorithm. There's no shortest
paths here. But one of the algorithms
will actually look pretty
similar.
Uh two lectures ago, the dynamic
programming lecture, we saw example
where we tried to do greedy and it gave
the wrong answer and so we fell back on
dynamic programming. Today we're going
to try to do dynamic programming. It's
going to fail and we're going to fall
back on greedy. So it's like the
reverse. But the way it's going to fail
is we're going to get exponential time
initially and then greedy will let us
get polomial time. This is actually a
bit unusual. I would say more typically
dynamic programming can solve anything
but you know with n to the seven running
time something slow and then you apply
greedy and you get down to like n or n
log n running time. So that's more
common but today we're going to go from
exponential down to polinomial and
that's pretty nice.
Um, cool.
So, let me tell you a little bit about
greedy algorithm theory, so to
speak. This is from the textbook.
Uh if your problem can be solved by a
greedy algorithm, usually you can prove
two properties about that
algorithm. One of them is called optimal
substructure and the other is called the
greedy choice property. Um, optimal
substructure is a very uh should be a
familiar
idea because it's essentially anap
encapsulation of dynamic
programming. Uh,
[Applause]
Greedy algorithms are in some sense a
special form of dynamic programming.
Uh so this is saying something like if
you can solve sub problems optimally
smaller sub problems or whatever then
you can solve your original problem and
this may happen recursively whatever
that's essentially what makes a
recurrence work for dynamic programming
and with dynamic programming we
uh for this to be possible we need to
guess some feature of the solution. Uh
for example in minimum spanning tree
maybe you guess one of the edges that's
in the right answer.
Uh and then once you do that you can
reduce it to some other sub problems and
if you can solve those sub problems you
combine them get an optimal solution to
your original thing. So this is a
familiar property. I don't usually think
of it this way for dynamic programming
but that is essentially what we're
doing.
uh via
guessing. But with greedy algorithms,
we're not going to guess. We're just
going to be greedy. Eat the largest
cookie. So that's the greedy greedy
choice
property. This says that eating the
largest cookie is actually a good thing
to do.
If we keep making locally optimal
choices, we end up with a globally
optimal
solution. No tummy ache.
This is something you wouldn't expect to
be true in general, but it's going to be
true for minimum spanning tree and it's
true for a handful of other problems.
You'll see a bunch more in recitation
tomorrow. Uh so first thing I'm going to
this is sort of general theory but I'm
actually going to have a theorem like
this for minimum spanning tree and a
theorem like this for minimum spanning
tree. That's this is the prototype but
most of today is all about minimum
spanning tree.
And for minimum spanning tree, neither
of these is very obvious. Uh so I'm just
going to show you these theorems.
They're fairly easy to prove in fact. Uh
but finding them is probably the tricky
part.
Actually, I guess optimal substructure
is probably the least intuitive uh or
the least obvious greedy choice. You're
probably already thinking what a good
greedy choice is. Minimum weight edge
seems like a good starting point uh
which we will get
to. But uh there's even a stronger
version of that which we will prove. And
first optimal substructure.
So here I'm going to think like a
dynamic program. Let's suppose that we
know an edge that's in our solution.
Suppose we know an edge that lives in a
minimum spanning tree. We could guess
that. We're not going to, but we could.
Um either way, let's just suppose that
an edge E
uh I should mention uh I guess I didn't
say this graph is undirected. uh minimum
spanning tree doesn't quite make sense
with directed graphs. There are other
versions of the problem but here graph
is undirected. Uh so probably I should
write this as a unordered set
UV and there are possibly many minimum
spanning trees. Uh there could be many
solutions with the same weight. For
example, if all of these edges have
weight one, all of these trees are
actually minimum. If all the edges have
weight one, every spanning tree is
minimum because every spanning tree has
exactly n minus one edges. So, uh, but
let's suppose we know an edge that's
guaranteed to be in some minimum
spanning tree, at least
one. Uh, what I would like to do is take
this. So, let me draw a picture. Um, we
have a graph.
We've identified some edge in the graph
E that lives in some minimum spanning
tree. I'm going to draw some kind of
tree structure
here. Okay, that's the wiggly lines are
the tree. Uh there's some other edges in
here which I don't want to draw too many
of them because it's ugly. Those are
other edges in the graph. Who knows
where they are? It could be all sorts of
things. Okay. But I've highlighted uh
the graph in a particular way. There's
because it's uh it's the minimum
spanning tree is a tree. If I delete E
from the tree, then I get two
components, right? Every edge I remove,
I'm I'm minimally connected. So if I
delete an edge, I disconnect into two
parts. So I've drawn that as the left
circle and the right circle. This just
general way to think about a tree. Now
there are other unused edges in this
picture. Who knows where they
live? Okay. What I would like to do is
somehow simplify this graph and get a
smaller problem. Say a graph with fewer
edges. Uh any suggestions on how to do
that?
I don't actually know where all these
white edges are, but what I'd like to do
is I'm supposing I know where E is, and
that's an edge in my minimum spanning
tree. So, how could
I get rid of it?
Yeah, the minimum weight.
I'd like to divide and conquer. Maybe
find the minimum weight over here,
minimum weight over here. Of course, I
don't know which nodes are on what side.
So, that's a little trickier. Uh, but
what do I do about E itself? Let's start
with
that. Yeah, remove it. You could remove
it. It's a good idea. Doesn't
work, but worth a Frisbeeian
nonetheless. Uh, if I delete this edge,
one problem is maybe none of these red
edges exist and then my graph is
disconnected. Well, maybe that's
actually a good case. Uh, that would
probably be a good case. Then I know how
to divide and conquer. I just look at
the connected components. In general, if
I delete the edge,
uh, and I have these red edges, then I
maybe find a minimum spanning tree on
what
remains.
Uh, maybe I'll end up including one of
these edges. Maybe this edge ends up in
the spanning tree and then I can't put E
in. So, it's a little awkward.
Yeah.
Merge the two nodes into one. Yes.
Purple frisbee.
Impressive. Uh this is what we call
contracting the
edge. Uh it just means merge the end
points. Merge U and
V. So I will
draw a new version of the
graph. So this was U and V before. I'll
put the label
inside. And now we have a new vertex
here which is uh UV or you can think of
it as the set UV. We won't really need
to keep track of names. uh and where
whatever edges you had over here
uh you're going to have over
here. Okay, just collapse U and V. The
edge E
disappears. Uh and one other thing can
happen. Let
me go over here.
We could end up with duplicate edges by
this process. So for example, suppose we
have U and
V and they have a common neighbor. Might
have many common
neighbors, who knows? And some other
edges, uncommon neighbors. Uh when I
merge, I'd like
to just have a single edge to that
vertex and a single edge to that vertex.
And what I'm going to do is if I have
some weights on these edges, let's say A
and B and C and D. Uh I'm just going to
take the
minimum because what I'm about to do is
compute a minimum spanning tree in this
graph. And if I take the minimum
spanning tree here and I had multiple
edges, one weight A, one weight B, do
you think I would choose the larger
weight edge? It does. They're exactly
the same edge, but one is higher weight.
There's no point in keeping the higher
weight one. So, I'm just going to throw
away the higher weight one. Take the
min. So, this is a particular form of
edge contraction in graphs.
uh and I claim it's a good thing to do
in the sense that if I can find a
minimum spanning tree in this new graph,
this is usually called uh G slash E
slash instead of negative uh to remove
E, I'm contracting E. So this is G slash
E, this is G.
If I can find a minimum minimum spanning
tree in G slash E, I claim I can find
one in the original graph G just by
adding the edge
E. Okay, so I'm going to say
um if t
prime is a minimum spanning tree of g/
e,
then t prime union
e is a minimum spanning tree of g.
So overall you can think of this as a
recurrence in a dynamic program. And let
me write down that dynamic
program. It won't be a very good dynamic
program but it's a starting
point. This is conceptually what we want
to do. Uh we're trying to guess an edge
E.
that's in a minimum spanning
tree. Uh then we're going to contract
that
edge. Uh then we're going to
recurse find the minimum spanning tree
on what remains. And then uh we find
minimum spanning tree. Then we want to
deontract the edge. Put it back. Put the
graph back the way it
was. And then add E to the minimum
spanning tree.
And what this lema tells us is that this
is a correct algorithm.
If you're lucky, and we're going to
force liness by trying all edges, but if
we start with an edge that is guaranteed
to be in some minimum spanning tree,
call it a safe edge, uh, and we contract
and we find a minimum spanning tree on
what remains, then we can put E back in
at the end and we'll get a minimum
spanning tree of the original graph. So,
this gives us correctness of this
algorithm. Now, this algorithm is bad
again from a complexity standpoint. uh
the running time is going to be
exponential. The number of subpros we
might have to consider here is all
subsets of edges. There's no particular
way
uh because at every step we're guessing
an arbitrary edge in the graph. Uh
there's no structure like we can't say
well it's the first k edges or some
substring of edges. It's just going to
be some subset of edges. There's
exponentially many subsets 2 to the e.
So this is exponential.
But uh we're going to make it
polomial by removing the guessing. This
is actually a really good prototype for
a greedy algorithm. If instead of
guessing trying all edges, if we could
find a good edge to choose that's
guaranteed to be in a minimum spanning
tree, then we could actually follow this
procedure. And this would be like a an
iterative algorithm. you you guess you
you don't guess you correctly choose a
good you take the biggest cookie uh you
contract it and then you repeat that
process over and over that would be a
prototype for a greedy algorithm and
that's what's going to work there's
different ways to choose this greedy
edge and we're going to get two
different algorithms accordingly
uh but that's where we're going first I
should prove this this claim because you
know where did edge contraction come
from why does it work uh there's
a it's not too hard to prove. Let's do
it
question. No. All
right. Uh should be able to do this
without looking.
Um
so proof of optimal substructure. So
we're given a lot. We're told that E
belongs to a minimum spanning tree.
Let's give that spanning tree a name. Uh
say uh we have a minimum spanning tree
star which contains
E. So we're assuming that exists. Then
we contract E and then we're given T
prime which is a minimum spanning tree
of G
SE and then we want to analyze this
thing. So I want to claim that this
thing is a minimum spanning tree. In
other words, that the weight of that
spanning tree uh is equal to the weight
of this spanning tree because this one
is minimum. This is a minimum spanning
tree of
G. And this is also supposed to be a
minimum spanning tree of
G.
Okay, sounds easy, right? Um I'm going
to cheat. Sorry.
Uh, I see. Right. Duh. Uh, easy once you
know how. So, what we're going to do is
think about contracting E. Okay, we
already know we're supposed to be
thinking about contracting E in the
graph. Let's look at how it changes that
given minimum spanning tree. So, we have
T star minimum spanning tree of the
whole graph. And then I'm going to
contract E. Uh what I mean is if that
edge happens to be in the spanning tree.
Well, uh it is actually we assume that E
is in there. So I'm basically removing
I'm just deleting that edge. Maybe I
should call it minus E.
uh then that should
be a spanning
tree of G slash E. So when I contract
the edge in the graph, if I throw away
the edge from this spanning tree, I
should still have a spanning tree. Now I
don't know whether it's minimum.
Probably it is, but uh we won't prove
that right
now. I claim it's still a spanning tree.
Uh what would that take? It still hits
all the vertices because uh if I remove
the edge things would not be connected
together. But uh this edge was in the
spanning tree and then I fuse those two
vertices together. So uh whatever
spanning I mean whatever was connected
before is still connected. Contraction
generally preserves connectivity. Uh if
these things were already connected
directly by an edge when I contract I
still have a connected structure. So I'm
still hitting all the vertices. Um, and
also the number of edges is still
exactly right. Before I had n minus one
edges. Afterwards, I'll still have n
minus one edges because I removed one
edge and I removed one vertex in terms
of the count. So that proves that it's
still a spanning tree uh using
properties of
trees. Uh, cool.
So that means uh the minimum spanning
tree this thing t prime the minimum
spanning tree of g/e has a smaller
weight than this one because this is a
spanning tree the minimum is smaller
than all spanning trees. So we know the
weight of t prime is less than or equal
to the weight of t
star minus
e.
Uh, cool. And now we want to know about
this
thing. The weight of T prime plus
E. Well, that's just the weight of T
prime plus the weight of
E because the weight of a tree is just
the sum of the weights of the edges. So,
this is less than or equal to W of T
star minus E plus E.
uh which is just the weight of t
star. Right? So we proved that the
weight of our proposed spanning tree is
less than or equal to the weight of the
minimum spanning tree in g and therefore
t prime union e actually is a minimum
spanning tree. Okay, this is really
easy.
actually implies that all these
inequalities have to be equalities
because we started with something
minimum. Clear? That's the easy easier
half. The more interesting property is
going to be this greedy choice property.
Uh this is sort of where the action is
for greedy algorithms. And this is
usually the heart of proving greedy
algorithms are correct. We don't yet
have a greedy algorithm, but we're
thinking about it. uh we need some way
to intelligently choose an edge E. And
I'm going to give you a whole bunch of
ways to intelligently choose an edge
E.
Uh little
So, here's a really powerful lema. We're
going to make it even stronger in a
moment.
Um, so I'm going to introduce the notion
of a cut. Uh, it's going to be a similar
picture to what I had
before. I'm going to look at some set of
vertices. S here is a subset of the
vertices.
And that leaves in the graph everything
else. This would be V minus
S. Okay. So there's some vertices over
here. Uh some vertices over here.
There's some edges that are purely
inside one side of the cut. And then
what I'm interested in are the edges
that cross the
cut. Okay? Whatever they look like.
these edges. If if an edge has one
vertex in V and one vertex not in V, I
call that edge a crossing
edge. Okay. Uh so let's
uh suppose that
E is a uh least weight
edge crossing the
cut. So let's say uh let me be
specific. If E is uh UV
uh then I want one of the end points
let's say U to be in S and I want the
other one to be not in S. So it's in
capital V minus S. Okay, that would be a
crossing edge and among all the crossing
edges I want to take one of of minimum
weight. There might be many but pick any
one then I claim that edge is in a
minimum spanning tree.
This is our golden ticket, right? If we
can guarantee an edge is in the minimum
spanning tree, then we plug that in
here. Instead of guessing, we'll just
take that edge. We know it's in a
minimum spanning tree. And then we'll
contract it and repeat this process. So
uh the tricky part I mean it is true
that the minimum weight edge is in a
minimum spanning tree. I'll give you
give that away but the question is what
do you do then uh we want to keep being
I guess you contract and repeat but that
will be Kuscal's algorithm but uh this
is in some sense a more general tool
that will let us identify edges that are
guaranteed to be in the minimum spanning
tree even after we've already identified
some edges as being in the minimum
spanning tree. So, it's a little more
powerful. Let's prove this this
claim. This is where things get
particularly
cool. And this is where we're going to
use something called a cut and paste
argument.
And if you are ever trying to prove a
greedy algorithm correct, the first
thing that should come to your mind is
cut and paste. This is a very this is
almost universally how you prove greedy
algorithms to be correct which is you
suppose you have some optimal solution
which doesn't have the property you want
like that it includes E here and then
you modify it usually by cutting out one
part of the solution and pasting in a
different part like E and prove that you
still have an optimal solution and
therefore there is an optimal solution
there is an MST that has the property
you
Okay, so we're going to do that by
starting from an arbitrary uh minimum
spanning
tree. So let t
star be a minimum spanning tree of
G. And if the edge E is in there, we're
done. So presumably uh E is not in that
minimum spanning tree.
We're going to modify t star to include
E. So again, let me draw the
cut. There's S and V minus S. We have
some edge E which crosses the cut, goes
from U to
V that's not in the minimum spanning
tree. Let's say in blue I draw the
minimum spanning
tree. So you know this minimum spanning
tree does it connects everything
together here.
Uh
it's I claim it's got to have some edges
uh that cross the cut because if it has
no edges that cross the cut, it doesn't
connect vertices over here with vertices
over here. So it may not use E, but some
of the edges must cross the
cut. So here's a possible minimum
spanning
tree. Uh it happens to have sort of two
components over here in S maybe. Who
knows?
Uh but there's got to be at least one
edge that crosses
over. In
fact, it's uh the minimum spanning tree
tar has to connect vertex u to vertex v
somehow. Doesn't use e, but there's got
to be it's a tree. So in fact, there has
to be a unique path from U to V.
in the minimum spanning
tree. And now U is in S. V is not in S.
So if you look at that path for a while,
you might stay in S, but eventually you
have to leave S, which means there has
to be an edge like this one,
uh, which I'll call E
prime, which transitions from S to V
minus S.
So there must be an edge E prime in the
minimum spanning tree
uh that crosses the
cut because U and V are connected by a
path and that path starts in S ends not
in S. So it's got to transition at least
once. It might transition many times but
there has to be at least one such edge.
And now what I'm going to do is cut and
paste. I'm going to remove E prime and
add in E
instead. So I'm going to look at T
star
minus minus E prime
uh plus
E. I claim that is a minimum spanning
tree. First I want to claim this is
maybe the more annoying part uh that it
is a spanning tree.
Uh this is more of a graph theory thing.
Um I guess one one comforting thing is
that you've preserved the number of
edges. So it should still be uh if you
get one property, you get the other. Uh
because I removed one edge, added one
edge, I'm still going to have n minus
one edges.
The worry I guess is that things become
disconnected when you do that. Uh but
that's essentially not going to happen
because if I think of removing E prime
again that disconnects the tree into two
parts and I know by this path that one
part contains this vertex another part
contains this vertex and I know uh that
this vertex is connected to U and this
vertex is connected to V. Maybe I should
call this U prime and V prime. I know U
and U prime are connected by a path. I
know V and V prime are connected by a
path. But I know that by deleting E
prime, U prime and V prime are not
connected to each other. Therefore, U
and V are not connected to each other
after removing E prime. So when I add in
E, I newly connect U and V again. And so
uh everything's connected back together.
I have exactly the right number of
edges. Therefore, I'm a spanning tree.
Okay, so that's the graph theory part.
Now the interesting part from a greedy
algorithm is to prove that this is
minimum that the weight is not too
big. So let's do that over here.
So I have the weight of T
star minus
E
plus minus E prime plus E. By linearity,
this is just the weight of T
star minus the weight of E prime plus
the weight of
E. And now we're going to use this
property. We haven't used that yet. E is
a least weight edge crossing the cut. So
E prime crosses the cut. So does E. But
E is the smallest possible weight you
can have crossing the cut. That means
that uh I'll put that over here. The
weight of E is less than or equal to the
weight of E
prime. E prime is a particular edge
crossing the cut. E was the smallest
weight of them. So that tells us
something about this.
uh signs are so difficult. Um I think
that means that this is negative or
zero right so this should be less than
or equal to w of t star and that's what
I want because that says the weight of
this spanning tree is less than or equal
to the optimum weight the minimum weight
so that means actually this must be
minimum so what I've done is I've
constructed a new minimum spanning tree
it's just as good as t star But now it
includes my edge E and that's what I
wanted to prove. There is a minimum
spanning tree that contains E provided E
is the minimum weight edge crossing and
cut. So that
proves this greedy choice property.
And I'm going to observe one extra
feature of this uh proof which is that
uh so we cut and paste in the sense that
we removed one thing which was E prime
and we added a different thing
E and uh a useful feature is that the
things that we change only uh are edges
that cross the cut. So we
only let's say modified
edges that cross the
cut. I'm going to use that later. We
removed one edge across the cut and we
put in the one that we
wanted. Okay, so far these are a bunch
of lemmas. Now we get to use al now we
actually get to do algorithms using
these lemas.
Um we'll start with maybe the less
obvious algorithm. Uh but it's nice
because it's very much like dystra
follows very closely to the dystra
model. Um and then we'll get to the one
that we've all been thinking about which
is choose a minimum weight edge uh
contract and repeat. That doesn't
well yeah that does work. Uh but the
obvious way is maybe slow. We want to do
it in nearlinear
time. Let's start with a dystra like
algorithm. This is prim's algorithm.
Maybe I'll start by writing down the
algorithm. It's a little
long. Um, in general, the idea we're
going to we want to apply this greedy
choice property. To apply the greedy
choice property, you need to choose a
cut. With prim, we're going to start out
with an obvious cut, which is a single
vertex. If we have a single vertex S and
we say that is our set capital S, then
you know there's some edges coming out
of it. There's basically S versus
everyone else. Um that's a cut. And so I
could take the minimum weight edge
coming out of that cut and put that in
my minimum spanning tree. So when I do
that, I put it in my minimum spanning
tree because I know it's in some minimum
spanning tree. Now I'm going to make s
capital S grow a little bit to include
that vertex and repeat. That's actually
also a very natural algorithm. Start
with a tiny S and just keep growing it
one by one. At each stage, use this lema
to guarantee the edge I'm adding is
still in the minimum spanning tree.
So to make that work
out, we're always going to need to
choose the minimum weight edge that's uh
coming out of the uh
cut.
And we'll do that using a priority
Q just like we do in Dystra.
So for every uh vertex that's in V minus
S uh we're going to have that vertex in
the priority
Q and the question is what is uh what is
the key value of that node stored in the
priority Q. So the invariant I'm going
to have is that the key of
V is the minimum of the weights of the
edges.
uh that cross the cut into
V. So for vertex V, I want to look at
the I'm not going to compute this every
time. I'm going to maintain it. I I want
that the minimum weight of an edge that
starts in S and goes to V, which is not
in S because uh V is in Q. Q only stores
vertices that are not in S. I want it I
want the key value to be that minimum
weight. So if I choose the overall
minimum vertex that gives me the edge of
minimum weight that crosses the cut.
Okay, I've sort of divided uh this
minimum into vertex by vertex. For every
vertex over
here, I'm going to say what's the
minimum incoming weight from somebody
over here? What's the minimum incoming
weight from someone over here to there
uh to here? Take the minimum of those
things. And of course, the min of all
those will be the min of all those
edges. Okay, that's how I'm dividing
things up and this will be easier to
maintain. But let me first initialize
everything.
Uh, okay. I guess we're going to
actually initialize with S being the
empty set. So Q will store
everybody. Uh, except I'm going
to get things started. by setting for
particular vertex little S, I'm going to
set its key to
zero. It doesn't matter who little S
is. Uh that's just your start
vertex. Just pick one vertex and set its
key to zero. So that will force it to be
chosen first because for everyone
else for v
uh not equal to
s I'm going to set the key to
infinity because we haven't yet seen any
edges that go in there. But we'll change
that in a moment.
Okay, so that was the initialization.
Now we're going to do a loop. We're
going to keep going until the Q is empty
because uh when the Q is empty, that
means S is everybody. And at that point,
we'll have a spanning tree on the whole
graph and it better be minimum.
Okay. And we're going to do that
by extracting the minimum from our
priority
Q. This when we remove Q,
uh when we move we remove vertex U from
the Q Q. This means that we're adding U
to S.
Okay, by taking it out of Q that means
it enters S by the invariant at the
top. So now we need to update uh this
invariant that all the key values are
correct. As soon as we move a vertex
into S, now there are new edges we have
to consider from S to not
S. And we do that just by looking at all
of the neighbors of U. So this we
haven't written this in a long time but
this is how it's usually written in
dystra except in dystra these are the
outgoing edges from u and v are the
neighbors here it's an undirected graph
so these are all of the neighbors v of
you. This is an adjacy
list. Okay.
Uh so we're looking at
u which has just been added to s and
we're looking at the edges. We want to
look at the edges that go to V minus S,
only those ones. And then for those uh
vertices V, we need to update their keys
because it used to just count all of
these edges that went from the rest of S
to V. And now we have a new edge UV that
uh V needs to consider because U just
got added to S. Okay. And uh so first
thing I'm going to say is if V is in Q.
So we're just going to store uh a
boolean for every vertex about whether
it's in the Q. And so when I extract it
from the Q, I just set that boolean to
false. Being in the Q is the same as
being not in S. This is what Q
represents. So Q is over here kind
of. So if we're in the
queue, same as saying V is not in S,
uh then we're going to do a check which
lets us compute the minimum. This is
going to look a lot like a
relaxation. Uh,
sorry. Okay, couple things going on
because I want to compute not just the
value of the minimum spanning tree, I
actually want to find the minimum
spanning tree. So, I'm going to store
parent pointers. Uh, but this is just
basically taking a min. I say if the
weight of this edge is smaller than
what's currently in the key, then update
the key because the key is supposed to
be the min. Okay, that's all we need to
do to maintain this invariant this for
loop. After the for loop, uh this
property will be restored. V.key will be
that
minimum. And furthermore, we kept track
of where the minimums came from. Uh so
when you end up extracting a vertex,
you've already figured out uh which edge
you added to put that into the set. So
in fact you already had a parent. This
would be uh
u. And we are basically we want to add
that edge into the minim minimum
spanning tree when we add U to S.
uh overall let me write why this is
happening at the end of the algorithm we
want for every vertex V we want
V.parent and that will be our minimum
spanning tree. Those are the edges that
form the minimum spanning tree.
Okay, let's
prove that this
works. Uh, actually, let's do an
example.
enough curves for a while. Uh, let's do
it over
here. Need a little break. Examples are
fun though. Easy to make mistakes. So,
correct me if you see me making a
mistake. Uh, let
me draw a graph.
Okay. Weights.
14 3 8 5 6
10.
Okay. Uh colors.
So uh I've I want to start at this
vertex just because it I know it does an
interesting thing or it's a nice
example. Uh here's my weighted
undirected graph. I want to compute
minimum spanning tree. I'm going to
start with uh capital S being well
actually I start with capital S being
nothing and all of the weights all of
the key values are initially infinity.
So I'm going to write the key values in
blue. So initially everything is
infinity for every
vertex except for s the value is
zero. Okay then uh so all of these
things are in my priority Q and so when
I uh extract from the Q I of course get
S. Okay, that's the point of that setup.
So, uh, that's when I draw the red
circle containing little S. The red
circle here is supposed to be capital
S. So, uh, at this point, I've added
capital S or little S to capital S. And
then I look at all of the neighbors V of
S and I make sure that they are outside
of S. In this case, they all are. All
three neighbors, these three guys, um,
are not in S. And then I look at the
weights of the edges here. Here I have a
weight seven edge that's smaller than
infinity. So I'm going to cross out
infinity and write seven. And 15 is
smaller than infinity. So I'm going to
cross out infinity. Write 15. And 10
surprise is smaller than infinity. So
I'm going to cross out infinity. Write
10. So now I've I've updated the key
values for those three nodes. I should
mention in the priority Q to do that
that is a decrease key operation.
This thing here is a decrease key. You
need to update the priority key to say,
"Hey, look, the key of this node
changed." And so you're going to have to
move it around in the heap or
whatever. Just like dystra, same thing
happens. Okay, so I've decreased the key
of those three nodes. Now I do another
iteration. I look at all of the key
values stored. The smallest one is
seven, right? uh because this node's no
longer in there. So I'm going to add
this node to capital S. So capital S is
going to grow to include that node. I've
extracted it from the Q. And now I look
at all the neighbors of that node. So
for example, here's a neighbor. Uh 9 is
less than
infinity, so I'll write nine. Here's a
neighbor. 12 is less than infinity, so I
write 12. Uh five is less than infinity,
so I write five. Here's a neighbor. Uh,
but S is in big S. So, we're not going
to touch that edge. We're not going to
touch
S. Okay. We'll end up looking at every
edge twice. So, no big deal. All right.
Now, who's smallest? Five. I think it's
the smallest blue
key. Uh, so we're going to add five to
the
set. Sorry. Add this vertex to the set
S. Uh, and then look at all of the
outgoing edges from here. Uh, so six is
actually less than 12. So this edge is
better than that one was. Uh, then
what's that? An eight. 8 is less than
10. Uh, 14 is definitely less than
infinity. And we look at this edge, but
that edge goes, it stays inside the red
set, so we forget about it.
uh next smallest value is six, right?
So,
uh six, we add this guy
in. We look at the edges from that
vertex, but actually nothing happens
because all those vertices are inside
capital S. So, we don't look at we don't
care about those edges. Next one is
uh eight, right? So we'll add in this
vertex. And there's only one edge that
leaves the cut. So that's three. And
three is indeed better than
14. So
whoa, never
mind.
Stop. Uh,
so good. Now I think the smallest key is
three. Notice smallest key is smaller
than anything we've seen before other
than zero, but that's okay. just add it
in. Uh, and there's no edges leaving the
cut from there. And then over here we
have nine and 15. So, first we'll add
nine. Uh, there's no edges there. Then
we add 15. Okay. Now S is everything.
We're done. Q is empty. Uh, where's the
minimum spanning tree? I forgot to draw
it. So, uh, luckily all of the edges
here have different numbers as labels.
So, when I have a three here, what I
mean is include three in the minimum
spanning tree. the edge that was labeled
three. Okay, so this will be minimum
spanning tree edge. Five will be minimum
spanning tree edge. These are the
actually the parent pointers. Six will
be a minimum spanning tree edge. Uh
seven,
9,
15, and
eight. Okay, every vertex except the
starting one will have a parent, which
means we'll have exactly n minus one
edges. That's a good sign.
uh and in fact this will be a minimum
spanning tree. That's the claim because
every time we grew the circle to include
a bigger thing, we're guaranteed that
this edge was in the minimum spanning
tree by applying this property with that
cut. Let me just write that down.
Okay. To prove correctness, you need to
prove an invariant that this key, the
key of every vertex always remains this
minimum. So this is an invariant. You
should prove that by
induction. I won't prove it here.
Uh but we have another
invariant more interesting one from an
MST perspective that's just a sort of
algorithm implementation detail uh that
the
tree uh t
subs within
s is always contained in a minimum
spanning tree of g. So over here uh we
have this way of computing minimum
spanning tree for all vertices V. But uh
what I'd like to do is just look at V
that's currently in S. By the end that
will be the whole thing. But if I look
at V and S and I always look at the edge
from V to
V.parent that gives me this tree
TS I claim it will be contained in a
minimum spanning tree of the entire
graph. Uh proof by induction.
So uh by induction let's
[Music]
assume induction hypothesis will be that
uh let's say there is a minimum spanning
tree
tar which contains t subs and then what
the algorithm does is it repeatedly
grows s by adding uh this vertex u to s.
So let's suppose that it adds
uh u to
s. So uh I'm actually going to look at
the edge that it adds.
So we
have S and V minus
S and we do this thing like we just saw
of growing by one. We add one new vertex
over here to S. And that vertex has a
parent edge, has a parent
pointer. So this edge I'm going to call
E. So we're adding some vertex U that we
extracted the minimum and we also added
an edge E to uh this TS because we grew
S by one.
Okay, when I do that, all I do is say,
look, greedy choice property guarantees
there's a minimum spanning tree that
contains E because E because we
extracted the min from the Q and the key
values are this as I was arguing before
that is the minimum overall edge that
crosses the
cut. E is a minimum weight edge that
crosses the cut. And so by greedy choice
property
uh there is some minimum spanning tree
that contains
E. But actually I need that the minimum
spanning tree not only contains E but
also contains all the other uh spanning
tree edges that we had already said were
in
TAR. Okay. So here's where I'm going to
use the stronger property. Um I can
modify
uh t
star to include
e and t
subs. So we already assume that t star
includes t subs. I just don't want to
break that.
And if you remember the proof of this
greedy choice property, we said, well,
we all we need to do is remove one edge
from the that crosses the cut and
replace it with E. So here, what I'm
saying is there's some edge. Yeah, maybe
there's some edge over here in the in T
star that we had to remove and then we
put E in. And then we get a minimum
spanning tree again. Uh T star
prime. Okay. uh this edge that I remove
cannot be one of the TS edges because
the TS edges are all inside S. So
because I'm only removing an edge that
crosses the cut, uh I'm not disturbing
TS. TS will remain inside T
star and but then I get the new property
that E is inside T star and so I prove
uh this invariant holds. Okay, I might I
keep changing t star, but I always
preserve the property that all of the
spanning tree edges that are inside S
are contained in some minimum spanning
tree of G. I'll add in some for
emphasis. Cool. So that's how we use the
greedy choice property to get uh
correctness of Prim's
algorithm. What's the running time of
Prim's algorithm?
same as Dystra. Good answer.
Uh I guess it depends what priority
queue you use, but whatever priority
queue you use is the same as
Dystra. And so in particular if we use
Fibonacci heaps which again we're not
covering uh we get uh v log v plus
e in general uh it is uh for every edge
we have to do a decrease key actually
for every edge we do two decrease key
operations potentially uh if you think
about it but uh you know this for loop
over the adjacy this is bas the cost of
this this stuff is constant the cost of
this is the degree of the vertex
uh
u and so we're basically doing the sum
of the degrees of the vertices which um
which is the number of edges times two
right that's the handshaking lema so for
every edge we're potentially doing one
decrease key operation and with
Fibonacci heaps that's constant time but
we're also doing v extract mins those
cost log v time because the size of the
q is at most v and so that is actually
the right running time Just like dystra.
So easy formula to
remember. All
right, let's do one more
algorithm. Cruscll's algorithm.
Crosscllow's algorithm is a little bit
weirder from the S perspective, I guess.
Uh, but we'll see we'll see what cuts
we're using in a moment.
Uh but it's based around this idea of
well the globally minimum weight edge is
the minimum weight edge for all cuts
that that cross it or for all cuts that
it crosses. The globally minimum weight
edge is going to be a valid choice. And
so by this theorem you pick some S that
partitions the end points of E. Uh
therefore E is in a minimum spanning
tree. So let's choose that one first and
then repeat. Conceptually, what we want
to do was that DP idea of contract the
vertex, sorry, contract the edge and
then find the minimum weight edge that
remains. Uh, but the way I'm going to
phrase it doesn't explicitly contract,
although implicitly it's doing
that.
And there's a catch.
The catch is uh
suppose I've you know picked some edges
out uh to be in my minimum spanning
tree. Suppose this was the minimum
weight and this was the next minimum.
Next minimum next minimum next minimum.
Suppose that the next large at this
point after contracting those edges the
minimum weight edge
is this one. Do I want to put this edge
in my minimum spanning tree? No. that
would add a cycle. Cycles are bad. So,
I'm going to have this is the tricky
part of this algorithm. I have to keep
track of uh whether I should actually
add an edge. In other words, whether
this vertex and this vertex have already
been connected to each
other. And it turns out you've already
seen a data structure to do that. Uh
this is what I call union find. And the
textbook calls disjoint set data
structure.
This is in
recitation recitation
three. So I want to maintain for my MST
so far. So I'm adding edges one at a
time and I have some tree. Well, it's
actually a forest, but I'm still going
to call it T.
Um, and I'm going to maintain it in a
unionfined structure.
disjoint set data
structure. Remember this had three
operations. Make set, union, and find
set. Tell me given an item, which uh
which set does it belong to. We're going
to use that. The sets are going to be
the connected components. So after I've
added these edges, these guys, these
vertices here will form one connected
component. and you know everybody else
will just be in its own separate
component. So to get started
uh I'm not going to have any edges in my
tree and so every vertex is in its own
connected component. So I represent that
by calling make
set of v for all for all vertices. So
every vertex lives in its own singleton
set. Okay. Uh, now I'd like to do the
minimum weight edge and then the next
minimum weight edge and the next minimum
weight edge. That's also known as
sorting. So I'm going to
sort E by
weight increasing
weight. So I get to start with
the minimum weight edge.
So, uh, now I'm going to do a for loop
over the
edges, increasing order by
weight. Now, uh, I want to know I just I
have an edge. It's basically the minimum
weight edge among the edges that remain.
And so I want to know whether I should
add it. I'm going to add it provided the
end points of the edge are not in the
same connected
component. Uh how can I find out whether
two vertices are in the same connected
component given this
setup? Yeah. Call set twice. Call find
set twice and see whether they're equal.
Exactly.
Good
answer. So
uh if fine
set of u is different from fine set of
v. Fine set just returns some
identifier. We don't really care what it
is as long as it returns the same thing
for the same set. So if u and v are in
the same set, in other words, they're in
the same connected component, then find
set will return the same thing for both.
But provided they're not equal, then we
can add this edge into
uh into our tree. So we add E to the set
T. Uh and then we have to represent the
fact that we just merge the connected
components of U and V. And we do that
with a union call.
And if you're ever wondering what the
heck do we use union fine for, this is
the answer. The union find data
structure was invented in order to
implement Crus's algorithm faster. Okay,
in fact, a lot of data structures come
from graph algorithms. The the re the
reason Fibonacci heaps were invented was
because there was Dyster's algorithm. We
wanted it to run fast. So same steel
here. You just saw it in the reverse
order. First you saw union fine. Now
union fine you know you can solve in
alpha of n time the inverse acrement
function super super tiny slow growing
function smaller than log log log log
log log log
um really small but we have this sorting
which is kind of annoying. So the
overall running time let's we'll worry
about correctness in a moment. We have
to sort
uh to sort e by
weight. Um, so I'll just call that sort
of E. Uh, then we have to do some
unions. Uh, I guess for every edge
potentially we do a union. So I'll call
that I'll just write E times alpha of
V. Uh, and then we have to do well we
also have to do fine sets but same same
deal. It's fine set and union cost alpha
amortized. So the total cost for doing
this for all edges is going to be the
number of edges times alpha and then
there's like plus v I guess but that's
that's smaller if it's a connected
graph. So uh other than the sorting time
this algorithm is really good. It's
faster. Uh but if you're sorting by an n
login algorithm this is not so great. Uh
that's that's how it goes. But I think
you can reduce this to sorting just v
things instead of e things uh with a
little bit of effort like doing a select
operation. But what when this algorithm
is really good is if your weights are
integers. If the in if you have weights
let's say uh weight uh of e is zero or
one or say n to the c for some constant
c then I can use radic sort linear time
sorting and then this will be linear
time and I'm only paying e times alpha.
So if you have reasonably small weights,
Kroscll's algorithm is better.
Otherwise, I guess um you prefer Prim's
algorithm. But either way,
uh I actually used this a variation of
this algorithm recently. If you want to
generate a random spanning tree, then
this you can use exactly the same
algorithm. You pick a random edge that
you haven't picked already. You see, can
I add this edge with this test? If you
can add it and repeat that will give you
a random spanning tree. It generate all
spanning trees uniformly
uh likely. So that's fun fact useful
thing for union
find. Let me tell you briefly about
correctness.
Again, we've proved correctness with an
invariant. Claim that at all times the
tree t of edges that we've picked so far
is contained in some minimum spanning
tree.
tar t star is going to change but uh I
always want that the edges I've chosen
to be inside a minimum spanning tree
again we can prove this by induction so
assume by
induction that this is true so
far and then uh suppose that we're
adding an edge here so we're converting
uh t into t prime which is t union e
By this the data structural setup I know
that the end points of E U and V are in
different connected components. So if I
in general what my picture looks like is
I have some various connected
components. Maybe there's a single
vertex whatever uh I've built a minimum
spanning tree for each one. I've built
some tree and I actually know that these
trees are contained in one global
minimum spanning tree.
Okay. And now we're looking at an edge
that goes from some vertex u in one
connected component to some vertex V in
a different connected component. This is
our edge
E. That's our
setup. Uh because the union fine data
structure maintains connected
components. That's another invariant to
prove. Uh we're considering adding this
edge which connects two different
connected components.
So uh I want to use the greedy choice
property with some s. What should S
be E to cross a
cut. So what's a good cut?
Yeah. The connected component of U and
then everything else. Uh connected
component of U and everything else. That
would work. Yeah. Which is also the
opposite of the connected component
containing V. There are many choices
that work. Uh I could take basically
this cut which is the connected
component of U with everything else
versus the connected component of V. I
could take this cut, which is a
connected kimono of you only versus
everybody else. Either of those will
work.
Good. Good curve. All right. Uh so let's
say S equals uh the connected component
of U or connected component of
V. E crosses that, right? Because it
goes it goes from U to V and U's on one
side, V is on the other side.
uh I I want it to include an entire
connected component because when I apply
the greedy choice property, I modify t
star and I don't want to modify I don't
want to delete any of these edges that
are already in my connected components
that I've already put in there. But if I
choose my cut to just be this, uh I know
that the edge that I potentially remove
will cross this cut, which means it goes
between connected components, which
means I haven't added that yet to t. So
when I do this apply this greedy choice
property I'm not deleting anything from
t. Uh everything that was in t is still
in t star. So uh that tells me that t
prime
uh is contained in t star prime. The new
t star that I get when I apply this the
the cut and paste argument. I modify t-
star potentially by removing one edge
and putting e in and the edge that I
remove was not already in t which means
I preserve this
part. Uh but I also get that my new edge
e is in the minimum spanning tree. And
so that's how you prove by induction
that at all times the edges that you've
chosen so far are in t star.
uh actually to to apply the greedy
choice property I need not only that E
is cut sorry that E crosses the cut I
also need that E is the minimum weight
edge crossing the cut that's a little
more argument to prove
um the rough idea is that uh if you
forget about the edges we've already
dealt with E is the globally minimum
weight edge okay but what about the
edges we've already dealt with some of
them are in the tree
um the edges that are in these that are
in T, those obviously don't cross the
cut. That's how we designed the cut. The
cut was designed not to cross, not to
separate any of these connected
components. So all the edges that we've
added to T, those are okay. Uh they
they're not related to the edges that
cross this
cut. But we may have already considered
some lower weight edges that we didn't
add to T. If we didn't add an edge to T,
that means actually they were in the
same set, which means also those are uh
use my other color
blue. Those are extra edges in here that
are inside a connected
component. Uh have smaller weight than
E, but they're inside the connected
component. So again, they're not
crossed. So uh they don't cross the cut
rather. So E is basically the first edge
that we're considering that crosses this
cut because otherwise we would have
added that other edge first. So here
we're we have to do sort of the greedy
argument again considering edges by
weight and E is going to be the first
edge that crosses this particular cut
which is this connected component versus
everyone else. So E has to be the
minimum weight edge crossing the cut. So
the greedy choice property applies. So
uh we can put E in the minimum spanning
tree and this algorithm is correct.
Okay, so we've used that lema a zillion
times by now. Um, that's minimum
spanning tree and nearly linear time.